and unfortunately so many of us are
literally giving ourselves cognitive
decline or simply sub-optimal cognition
because we are not doing the right thing
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with dr dale
bredesen who is a world-renowned brain
health researcher and the best-selling
author of the end of alzheimer's dale
welcome to the show
thanks so much tom great to be here
so i want to
dive into something that is
extraordinarily important to me which is
cognitive optimization it's something
that i think a lot about and
there are few people that i've seen take
the approach that you take most people
have said for
ever basically that there is no cure for
um cognitive decline and once you're
sort of on the backslide that's just it
there's not a lot that you can do
um
you were so bold as to write a book
called the end of alzheimer's so what is
it that you know
that everybody else doesn't
yeah and i should say you know that that
cognitive optimization now
goes very well with prevention of
alzheimer's in the future so what we
used to think of as hey you don't have
to worry about this until you're in your
60s no we should be doing in our teens
20s 30s 40s
we'll get better outcomes we'll get you
know we will get better brain health
we'll get better performance so the the
goal of my laboratory over the years was
to look at what are the molecular
mechanisms that drive the degenerative
state people say alzheimer's is because
of free radicals it's because of metal
binding problems it's because of
misfolded proteins it's because of
prions it's because you know what what
have you
and the reality is
that people don't understand what it is
so that's what we set out to look at 30
years ago
and what we found was really surprising
what we found is that at the heart of
alzheimer's is an insufficiency you
literally have a plasticity network in
your brain that responds and again this
is not surprising if you think about
what it takes to make a country work or
to make your business work you have a
supply you have a demand
so what happens in alzheimer's you have
a chronic mismatch between the demand
and the supply and there are four big
things that affect those number one
anything that drives ongoing
inflammation and that can be dentition
so changes in your oral microbiome
changes in your sinus microbiome gut
microbiome um systemic inflammation
metabolic syndrome uh p gingivalis
herpes simplex one on and on and on
anything that drives inflammation
anything that adds toxicity to your
brain and unfortunately as you know we
are all exposed to toxins like never
before
from the california fires to the you
know the air pollution that we live with
to the processed foods that we are
exposed to you know on and on and on to
you know the water supply and on and on
so those are two of the big ones the
third one
is trophic support so this was actually
discovered years ago by rita levy
montgomery who won the nobel prize for
her work she discovered the first one
which she called the nerve growth factor
these are typically proteins that bind
to specific receptors in your brain and
essentially say things are good so what
happens with alzheimer's is
you have this set of
things that are sub-optimal and as i
said that can be inflammatory things it
could be toxic things can be reduced
growth factor and trophic support
including nutrients and hormones and
then energetics and that's a
misunderstood one many people here's a
simple example of many
you go to sleep at night you drop your
oxygenation for many people they don't
realize this is happening sometimes in
their 20s 30s 40s now you can check this
easily check it with your apple watch
check it you know with a better
whatever you like or get out or get a
sleep study you should be sitting at 96
to 98 percent
oxygen
what drops people's levels so when i
started researching you i literally
immediately i just i paused my research
and went and bought two oximeters one
for myself and one for my wife
and then i started thinking well wait a
second what would cause my oxygen levels
to drop would it be
um just sleep apnea or are there other
things yeah the most common is sleep
apnea and by the way that happens more
in males more as we get a little older
more as we are a little overweight which
again a big problem in our country uh in
the western world more as we have
inflammation so systemic inflammation
associated with sleep apnea a lot of
people will actually improve their sleep
apnea just as they improve their
inflammatory status but there are also
other conditions uh there's one for
example something called uars
upper airway resistance syndrome where
you don't actually have apnea episodes
but you are essentially struggling to
get enough air through there while
you're sleeping so it's a resistance
syndrome and by because of that you're
now repeatedly making a little bit of
adrenaline boom so you're waking up
again and again and again
so again good to know that you're
sleeping that you're getting enough rem
sleep you're getting enough slow wave
sleep you're getting enough deep sleep
and you're getting enough overall sleep
these are all critical features again
these are things that we take for
granted and unfortunately so many of us
are literally giving ourselves cognitive
decline or simply sub-optimal cognition
because we are not doing the right thing
so i'm gonna i'm gonna put a mile marker
for people and as soon as i heard you
say it i thought oh my god of course
this is the answer that
it's diet it's lifestyle it's uh
exposure to toxins it's like a whole
bunch of things i've heard you say
before there's no silver bullet but
there's potentially silver buckshot that
if if we deal with all of these
different assaults on the brain
that are causing the the um insults the
injuries then
you're not going to have the cognitive
decline that it isn't
the amyloid plaque to use an analogy
um
so many people and this is the part that
literally until two days ago when i
started researching for this um i hadn't
heard anybody say i i had only ever
heard amyloid plaque amyloid plaque
emily plaque and
if you think of amyloid plaque as the
water that's on the house after a house
fire your to blame the water would be to
fundamentally misunderstand the problem
and you talk like a functional medicine
practitioner so can you walk us through
like just the basic
things that people encounter on a daily
basis you threw out processed food
already but things like mold and you
talked about air pollution like what are
some of the the just
everyday insults people are taking
yeah so let me just quickly walk through
what this disease actually is because
that's the whole
that's the whole point of this that when
you're stuck back in the idea that the
amyloid is causing the id the disease
itself it makes no fundamental sense
then you say well wait a minute amyloid
turned out to be an antimicrobial
peptide so no surprise it is part of
your defense so again your brain is
deciding are things good and i'm going
to grow and maintain synapses or am i
under assault from any of these various
things that we'll talk about and
therefore i have to go into protection
mode i'm going to pull back and say okay
i won't have quite as many synapses but
i'll survive and that's what's happening
as we get a little older we begin
before you know 20 years before
alzheimer's we begin to downsize
unfortunately
let's get into the mechanism of that
really fast so
i like that it's very clear and i know
hippocampal density is one of the things
you look at to judge whether somebody is
having this problem or not so
what's going on is the brain is
permanently staying in the mode of
um protect downsize
and
even in old age should it be alternating
between protect and grow
yes you should yeah you should be able
as long as you don't have a lot of
inflammation a lot of toxicity you got
the support from trophic factors
hormones and nutrients and you've got
support for energetics your brain should
be able to make and maintain senate
that's why we people say oh this
person's 95 years old but she's sharp as
a tap or he's sharp as attack you see
this all the time and this is because
they've got that appropriate balance and
so as they're shrinking is so obviously
if you don't remove the insult the
injury um and you said that you know
trying to treat the symptoms of
alzheimer's would be like trying to
repair your house as it's on fire and it
it doesn't make sense i that conjured
such a powerful image but why does it
keep shrinking and shrinking and
shrinking right so when we said this
about the house and fire for stem cells
the idea was if you're only giving a
monotherapy so you're just taking a
situation where you don't know what
these things are that are causing you to
be in that pullback mode you're just
going to throw some stem cells in there
yeah they're going to help
transiently but you're still the house
is still burning down and you're trying
to now do something you're trying to
rebuild it as it's burning down so
here's the thing
we have this set of things and so
chronically we are shrinking shrinking
as we're on the wrong side of this
balance the supply is being exceeded by
the demand well you'll keep downsizing
until these until you can meet the
demand so that's why you need to remove
those insults and as you indicated
there are several common ones so let's
start with you know what are the common
things for people that to be insulted by
as we are as we are living
well we found subtypes of alzheimer's
that tell you uh is yours mostly
inflammatory atrophic glycotoxic etc and
we can see markers for that in the blood
yeah you can see markers for those in
the blood so you can say this person is
mostly an inflammatory alzheimer patient
or inflammatory pre-alzheimer's and
again pre-diabetes we recognize more and
more pre-alzheimer's incredibly
important
to if we're going to make alzheimer's a
rare condition which is exactly what it
should be
so anything that's inflammatory so we
should know
how we're doing with our oral microbiome
do you have a lot of pathogens do you
have poor dentition you are increased
risk for cognitive decline if you do
and then do you have leaky gut so again
leaky gut is something that i wasn't
taught about in medical school
but turns out to be quite common for
many of us
and when you have that it will
contribute to systemic inflammation and
therefore increase your risk for
cognitive decline so these are all parts
of type 1 or inflammatory cognitive
decline and then type 2 is atrophic and
so that's on the supply side where you
have reductions and a typical thing
people will have poor thyroid hormone or
reduced testosterone or reduced
estradiol or reduced vitamin d or
increased homocysteine on and on so
there's a whole set of things again
required to make your brain function
well and i think everybody has that
feeling i have a day where you get up
and wow i'm really on today things are
going great and on the other hand
everyone's had days where like wait a
minute things are just not right today
so that's another big a big one there
then glycotoxic so one of the most
common contributors in the united states
to cognitive decline
is insulin resistance there are about 80
million americans who have insulin
resistance
many of them go on to have type 2
diabetes but you don't have to have type
2 diabetes insulin is not only the thing
that deals with glucose of course it's
an energy related hormone but it's also
quite an important growth factor for
brain cells and so when we used to grow
brain cells in a dish all the time we
would always have to include insulin in
their medium to keep them alive and to
keep them interacting unfortunately what
happens to us is
we are exposed to
high carb diets low fiber diets high
glycemic loads and so we put out all
this insulin for years and therefore we
end up developing you can actually
follow the biochemistry of it irs1 the
signaling molecule downstream from the
insulin receptor has specific
phosphorylation sites multiple
when it is on signaling the tyrosine
phosphorylation is high and the serine
threonine phosphorylation is low when
you have insulin resistance that changes
you have specific sites that that are
phosphorylated on serines and threonines
which is literally saying to you we're
turning down the volume here
and so this is now not giving its
appropriate signaling you have insulin
resistance and you can check everyone
should know their homa ir
this is a simple calculation to tell you
whether you have insulin resistance if
you do you are at increased risk for
cognitive decline and you're probably
not as sharp as you should be so that's
what we call type 1.5 because it's both
an atrophic one and an inflammatory one
of course the glycation of your proteins
everyone's familiar with hemoglobin a1c
which is what we measure for glycation
of these proteins but there are hundreds
of proteins that are non-enzymatically
glycated when you have high glucose
levels
so i've heard i've heard um alzheimer's
referred to as type 3 diabetes um
but researching you that seems like even
that while probably a pretty big
breakthrough compared to people talking
just about amyloid plaques
still feels like a simplification
so
how many total types are there
if i remember right there's five or six
and
can you just for anybody that's taking
notes can you just walk through with
like a really simple type one is this
type 1.5 type 2 so on that'd be great
absolutely type 1 is inflammatory as i
mentioned type 2 is atrophic
type 1.5 is glycotoxic
and so and then type 3
is toxic and there are three types of
toxins the you're talking about the
metallotoxins and inorganics the
organics and the biotoxins things like
mycotoxins so that's type 3 toxic type 4
is vascular again hugely important to
get appropriate energy you need the
oxygen you need the ketosis you need the
blood flow you need the mitochondrial
support and then type five is traumatic
so you've got a history of head injury
especially recurrent head trauma not
only are you at increased risk for cte
but also for alzheimer's disease okay so
let's sort of flip the script here
we're now thinking like a functional
medicine practitioner we're looking at
the holistic approach like
this i think
identifying what causes alzheimer's
cognitive decline figuring out how to
begin to reverse that also tells us how
to stay optimal or even you know a
little beyond to get to my obsession um
what does that protocol look like what
are we eating what are we doing are we
in the sauna are we exercising we're
getting sunlight like what are what are
the things people can do
great point so i have a book coming out
actually in august which is called the
first survivors of alzheimer's and
fantastic seven wonderful stories from
seven people who actually developed
alzheimer's we're told you're going to
die you've got alzheimer's all of you
alzheimer's were these people
most of them had
relatively early stage we have had some
people very late stage who have improved
but what happens is they tend to improve
but they don't get all the way back to
normal so we that's one of the things
we're working on right now how do we
take someone with late stage alzheimer's
and get them all the way back to normal
what we can do is we can get them
improved somewhat for for people with
early stage or especially
pre-alzheimer's we see tremendous
improvements we see people go from
moca scores of you know 19 which is very
impaired it goes from zero
mocha's montreal cognitive assessment so
it's a kind of standard test that's used
and uh everyone should be scoring in the
28 to 30 30 is a perfect score and so we
had people down in 19 which is you know
alzheimer's disease who came back to 30
so very very striking uh and and so yeah
very enthusiastic about that but you
brought up a good point in this book we
have a chapter specifically on enhancing
normal cognition so what are all the
things that you can do to get best
outcomes
and yes there's a whole program very
much like what we're using to bring
people from sub-optimal cognition to
optimal cognition you can start with
normal and improve on your cognition and
yes it has to do with a whole set of
things you're right detox is part of it
we all have a some degree of exposure to
toxicity
by the air we're breathing by the water
we're drinking by the food we're eating
uh you know just if you're eating
mercury filled seafood if you're not
eating grass-fed beef
if you've got a high carb diet if you're
eating simple carbs all of these things
are contributing to a lesser than
optimal outcome so you're absolutely
right just getting in that sauna getting
a sweat going and then using a non-toxic
soap like castile together i want to go
slow through this this this is something
that i've heard you say a lot and i've
never heard of these soaps um so is
castile a brand
no it's a type of soap and the whole
idea of this is that they are
they help you to get rid of the toxins
without adding more toxin you don't want
a lot of phrases in the sun the soap's
not helping you get rid of toxins i
would assume
well no what happens is the sauna is
driving them out okay so just through
sweat
right and if you don't then wash them
away they will slowly reabsorb so you
think about it you know you want to get
rid of toxins by imbibing less obviously
less exposure less of the eating less of
the breathing less of the drink all that
stuff and by the way all of us who are
in the california fires you know had a
setback because of that that's an issue
and we've had patients who were in for
example the world trade center cloud if
you look at everyone in the world trade
center cloud
just by 2015 13 of them already had
cognitive decline these are people
yeah relatively young scary as hell it
really is um this being in that trade
center cloud increased your risk not
only for what we've heard about lung
disease and cancers but also for
cognitive decline okay so just by way of
example sorry to i want to keep going
slow so that i make sure people can
really take this into their lives okay
so i'm in the world trade center the
problem is
forgetting cancer for a second and lung
disease which are maybe more obvious but
i'm i'm taking something in it's getting
into my bloodstream it's crossing the
blood-brain barrier and
some mechanism is happening in my brain
i'm guessing the amyloid plaques are
actually glomming on to these toxic
particles that have made their way into
my brain my brain goes into
survival mode so i'm not in growth and
repair i'm just trying to survive i'm
shrinking shrinking so okay to one to
try to minimize it i can hepa filter the
life out of my space
number two i've taken in some toxins i
recognize that so now i'm doing
something to make me sweat does is a
sauna an exercise identical or does the
sauna have certain benefits that
exercise doesn't or vice versa
they both have their own benefits but
they both do have sweating as one of
their benefits um yes with with exercise
you're also improving blood flow to your
brain the sauna doesn't do that as much
on the other hand sun is dropping your
blood pressure i'm actually kind of
relaxing the arterial stiffness for a
period of time some people unfortunately
will pass out in saunas as you know so
be careful about that
but yes you also want to increase your
glutathione you want also want a
supplementing or diet there are a couple
ways to go and for many of these things
you can do it with diet so an example
you want to take some sulforaphane very
helpful and you can get this with
broccoli sprouts as an example and is
this for everybody or only if we're in a
a big environmental toxin
moment
yeah so that's the that's exactly the
point
we are all living in a toxic world
that's the problem human beings are
complicated organisms and we are all
exposed to some degree of toxicity and
so we realize that detoxification is not
just for sick people it's also for
people who want to be healthier who want
to enjoy a better future with a lower
risk of cognitive decline a lower risk
of cancer a lower risk of chronic
illness i think this is something that
you know we've thought about medicine as
we do fine and then we get sick and then
we take a pill and we're going to be
better again but that's not the way it
works and then when i was on the
national aging council there was an
epidemiologist who did a very
interesting study looking at when on
average do u.s citizens develop their
first chronic illness and the answer was
in our 40s when do citizens of the uk
develop their first chronic illness
in their 50s so we're almost 10 years
worse than the uk we don't think of the
uk as being being a tremendously healthy
group but they are healthier than united
states citizens on average again we so
we've got that combination of diet
poor exercise
high stress
poor sleep and without a lot of brain
training that is a recipe i wrote in the
first book uh the the end of alzheimer's
a chapter specifically on how to give
yourself alzheimer's you want to give
yourself alzheimer's i can help you do
that um it's actually pretty easy you do
all these things the opposite of what
we're recommending and even though you
won't have alzheimer's on day one you'll
have the biochemistry that leads to it
down the road so you can you know you
can impact yourself a lot by looking at
that you know that whole set of things
all right let me give myself alzheimer's
real quick and tell me if i got it right
or if i'm missing anything
um i'm gonna totally disrupt my sleep
i'm going to
avoid sunlight so no vitamin d right i'm
going to take in as much breathable
toxin as humanly possible i'm definitely
going to be doing things like smoking or
sitting in traffic
um i am
going to i'm going to do
pro-inflammatory stuff so i'm going to
be
lots of carbohydrates very low fat
i'm going to eat a lot of big
seafood so things that live for a long
time and eat a lot of smaller fish
um they're trying to think about the
other six they're well i've gotten
several of them
yeah cheeseburgers fries and a coke so
lots of sugar
lots of saturated fat and no fiber that
is what we call the berfuda
triad so it's kind of like the bermuda
tri triangle this is the brafuda
triangle
and so it's giving you this combination
so you want to have a leaky gut you want
to have a very high stressful job and
the bottom line for the chapter was you
want to do what so many of us are doing
all the time that is why
15 of us are dying of alzheimer's
disease because we live in a society and
live in such a way and eat in such a way
and sleep in such a way and have stress
in such a way that we are doing all the
things that are pro alzheimer's by the
way before we ever get alzheimer's many
of us will avoid alzheimer's but we're
still going to have sub-optimal
cognition
so we're not going to do and you know
many of us face that oh my god it's the
afternoon i can barely keep my eyes open
i can barely focus i can barely get my
job done i can't work fast enough those
sorts of things those are all critical
okay so i want to stay on toxicity for a
second
is fiber tied to toxicity or does that
have a
absolutely so how do you get rid of
these toxins so what's happening is you
have a dynamic balance you're exposed to
toxins all the time and you are
metabolizing them inactivating them
excreting them all the time so what's
happening if you're on the wrong side of
that balance you have a bad future if
you're on the right side you're just
getting better all the time so as you
said you want to absolutely reduce your
exposure find out what your home army
score is that's from the epa
if it's high get rid of you remediate
and get rid of that exposure
avoid the california fires avoid being
on the 405 you know at rush hour and
that sort of thing as you mentioned hepa
filters very important i think you know
everybody should think about hepa
filters in their home
cleaner air no question very very good
and then
the appropriate urination so yeah
filtered water so many of us are exposed
to really low quality water
um so that's a you know that's a huge
issue um and you know appropriate you
know urination every day very very
helpful high fiber diets you're
literally moving out these things so
you've got a couple of ways to do it
right and then you can you're also
sweating them out and it's different
toxins that are being removed by these
different mechanisms and then of course
you're also breathing them out so you
want to optimize those things and then
in your blood flow you want to have high
glutathione levels high vitamin c levels
so you want to have the appropriate
detoxicants
to bind these things up now you
mentioned metals so many of us are
exposed to heavy metals and and dr joe
pizzorno has made a wonderful career as
a as a toxicologically oriented
physician
at looking at how many of us are exposed
to too much mercury too much lead too
much arsenic too much on the persistent
organic pollutants and we don't realize
it as he points out it's one of the
major players in this increase in type 2
diabetes that has affected so many
people in the united states yes part of
it is obesity part of it is poor diet
but part of it also is exposure to
arsenic as it turns out
so where are we taking arsenic in
yeah you're taking arsenic in from
several sources you get it from
groundwater that's one of the most
important things so you can look up what
is the water in my area in terms of
arsenic where does it stand there are
certain areas of utah for example very
high in arsenic and groundwater and then
interestingly
a lot of chicken so for people who eat a
ton of non-organic chicken beware check
your arsenic level
rice another big one for people who eat
a ton of rice check to see what your
arsenic level is because again it's
something you can detox from
and so you don't want to be keeping that
stuff around it's it can be damaged it
also increases your risk for cancer by
the way
and as a group these things all increase
your risk for cognitive decline so again
you can do so yes you want to give
yourself alzheimer's toxicity is part of
it and i can i can help you so that you
can give yourself alzheimer's fairly
quickly
it's it's very kind i'm glad that you
can also do the reverse and help me
unwind some of this stuff so let's talk
about um
there's a mechanism in the brain that i
found very interesting basically a
mechanism by which we're metabolizing
and flushing out the
amyloid plaques that this is part of a
process another one of your balance
things um what can we do to promote
where it's like okay cool i had um
something across the blood-brain barrier
whether it's a virus fungi whatever and
amyloid plaques wouldn't got it and now
what can i do to make sure that that
gets flushed out so one of my colleagues
at ucla a guy named milan ciao professor
milan fiala really interesting character
and what this guy showed is that you're
you have this natural thing where you
actually your macrophages and your
circulating macrophages which are your
monocytes you can you can isolate take a
little your blood take your monocytes
and then feed them the amyloid and see
how good how good are they at eating the
amyloid and for a normal person you eat
the animal you're taking it up and get
rid of getting rid of it pretty quickly
for people who have cognitive decline
they're very slow and it's because
they don't it goes right back to the
balance that we talked about before if
you have ongoing inflammation
what your body is saying to you is hey
tom you've got you've got an insult from
these various organisms so the last
thing you want to do is eat up and get
rid of your amyloid because your amyloid
has an antimicrobial effect it is part
of your innate immune system by the way
so we want to leave that amyloid there
so that it can continue to kill the bugs
so if you want to get rid of your
amyloid and flush it out you want to
start by having a pristine system in
which there isn't systemic inflammation
because then your body because you're
you're working against yourself as long
as you're saying hey i'm inflamed i've
got these various things from my oral
microbiome or sinusitis or what have you
in my brain you're not going to get rid
of amyloid you're going to make more
because you're trying to fight those
things so the first thing to do is shut
off the reason for making it the insults
second thing to do is to bind it up and
by the way curcumin binds it up very
nicely so this is why again many people
will actually shave a little turmeric on
their food people from india do this for
years and years and it keeps that
amyloid low it helps to remove it it
binds it and helps to remove it now
again you don't want to remove it if
you've got systemic inflammation going
on but if you have an anti-inflammatory
state you can slowly remove it guess how
else you remove it getting a good
night's sleep very good to help remove
it and again other things like uh
excellent exercise you're getting that
blood flow you're essentially ex you're
doing more exchange than you would
otherwise be doing supporting it with
appropriate oxygenation
okay so um let's go real deep on diet
here so
uh i don't know what percentage of the
issue you would prescribe to diet um but
my sort of knee-jerk reaction if
somebody's like my flight was delayed
i'm like it's your diet like i just to
me everything comes back i know i'm
oversimplifying but so much comes back
to diet so um you said something that i
found really interesting
which was think of me so i go hard on
meat uh grass-fed but still i like my
meat
and you said to treat meat like a
condiment so i found that very
interesting so what should my diet be
and assume i'm willing to do whatever
you tell me is optimal
yeah and again
you are relatively young that's great so
when you're young great have a high
protein diet no problem you want to get
clean protein of course so you want to
put things in that that are cleaner that
don't have all the pesticides don't have
all the hormones don't have all the
heavy stress you know many of these
animals dying from bacterial infections
so you've got that now so that you want
to avoid that so you already mentioned
you're doing uh you know you're you're
eating things that are grass-fed beef
fantastic the key here is you want to
stay away from high simple carb diets
that is bad for everybody and again it's
an important part of being able to give
yourself alzheimer's optimally if you
really want to give yourself alzheimer's
have plenty of simple carbs so what you
want to have is a high good fats
polyunsaturates and monounsaturates so
olive oil so uh eating avocados uh you
know eating any sorts of
oils even some small amount of saturated
fats coconut oil uh not not even so bad
you don't want to have a ton of linoleic
acid be careful about the omega-6s you
want it for for most of us the average
american diet has about 15 to one
omega-6 to omega-3 it's unbelievable so
we're basically saying let's give
ourselves as much inflammation as we can
and as little anti-inflammatory if we
can get it closer to
one to one two to one three to one even
four to one
that's where where are the big um
omega-6s coming in so grain-fed beef
would have a ton of omega-6 yeah you're
getting it from
you're basically getting it from seed
oils things like that
um so you want to be careful about these
seed oils that can have you know that
can have also known as vegetable oil
yeah vegetable oil stuff like that you
know palm oil things like that
stick with the avocado oil and that sort
of thing and the extra virgin olive oil
on the positive side and to be fair you
do get a lot of omega-6s from nuts
so you want to have some nuts because
they do give you good oils but you don't
want to be going crazy on the nuts
because they can give you too much on
the inflammatory side do i need raw nuts
can i have roasted salted
raw and minimally roasted don't roast
them to death because you're damaging
the oils then you can you know you can
oxidize the oils
remember when
saturated fats are hard to oxidize
because they don't have double bonds but
the unsaturated fats have those double
bonds that make them quite susceptible
to oxidation they can go rancid that's
the idea
uh and so be careful of rancidity
okay so um
now let's talk about the meat in that so
i've heard you say plant rich so i want
to have
what percentage like if you were going
to ballpark me calories what what
percentage of my calories do i want from
plants
yeah so here's the thing let's work from
the biochemistry side here's what then
we'll talk about if you want to end up
with perfect brain function here's what
you need to do to do that okay so for
good brain function you want to be able
to have some ketosis so you want to have
a mildly ketonic diet do you check your
ketones and are you driving yourself
into mild ketosis i i checked my ketones
so ferociously for so many years even
though i don't check them now i can feel
it right explain to me though why why do
i want to be in ketosis at some periods
and you should probably tell people
about your keto 12 3
just so that they get sort of your
overall philosophy and then i promise i
mentioned seafood we will come back to
that uh but yeah walk us through the
the
why of ketosis
right so the thing is that your brain
functions it's got to have it's got to
have energy and you get two types you
can either metabolize glucose or you can
metabolize ketones that's what your
mitochondria use in your brain and good
brain function is a lot about energetics
as we talked about before and by the way
alzheimer's is a lot about poor
energetics
poor mitochondria poor evaluation so
what happens is so many of us we should
be metabolically flexible you should be
able to go back and forth you have some
carbs you metabolize that the next meal
you have a lot of fats you can
metabolize ketones which come from the
metabolism of the fats and you go back
and forth that's where you want to be
for so many of us though we're purely on
the carbs and so even beginning in your
late 20s if you're at risk and if you if
our apoe4 positive and let's digress for
one moment to talk about apoe do you
know your apoe status i don't but after
listening to you i i am desperate to get
tested yeah so three quarters of people
in the country
are apoe4 negative which means your
lifetime risk for alzheimer's about nine
percent or so
about 75 million americans have one copy
of apoe4 so they got it from either
their mother or their father but not
both
and they are their risk goes from 9 for
their life to 30 for their life and then
7 million americans have two copies they
got one from their mother and one from
their father and they are
well over fifty percent more likely that
they will get alzheimer's than that they
will avoid it well good now we can make
sure that nobody gets it again by doing
the right things by checking these
things before you get it unfortunately
most people don't know so when you have
apoe
then you have an increased risk for
cognitive decline you have an increased
risk for inflammation
and so you you want to know that in
terms of what you're going to be doing
optimally
and by the way it's uh it's one of the
key issues for uh for seafood so
improving and one of the reasons to to
to get your appropriate fats on board so
those people are specifically should be
staying away from a lot of saturated
fats so all we're trying to do is drive
people get you into ketosis if you take
someone who's apoe4 positive as an
example by the late 20s you can see a
decreased glucose utilization
in the temporal lobe and the parietal
lobe that's the signature of alzheimer's
and many years later but you're
beginning to see the first changes in
the late twenties and early thirties so
again why we can't
so i know enough about apoe4 to ask
maybe the right question so apoe4
you put in a historical context really
amazing that it actually would have been
very beneficial to our long long ago
ancestors who were just coming down out
of the trees they needed a
pro-inflammatory state to deal with
punctures in their feet infections
eating raw food all that i thought that
was a brilliant take that
it's actually disappearing
because of the changes in the lifestyle
but it actually served a purpose that i
don't know that made me feel better
about it
but that the reason that i begin to get
the decrease in uptake of um
insulin is because uh i'm in a
pro-inflammatory state is that
what's causing that yes because you have
this beginning of loss of utilization
and it is related to
insulin resistance a pro-inflammatory
state you can bridge that gap and some
beautiful work from dr stephen kunin
show that you can bridge that energy gap
with ketones so that's why we want to
get you into a mildly ketotic state
and for anyone with cognitive decline we
definitely want to get you into a mildly
ketotic state and that means a low carb
diet now there's nothing again nothing
wrong with appropriate meats and
especially you know think about uh you
know fish
especially the smash fish but the little
guys salmon mackerel anchovies sardines
and herring those are the good guys you
don't want the high mercury guys because
they can they can hurt you and you want
wild caught fish grass-fed beef nothing
wrong with that if you want to be a
vegetarian fine if you want to have
grass-fed beef no problem
and it does it'll help you obviously
with uh
avoiding uh uh you know avoiding
sarcopenia as you get a little older uh
you know loss of muscle mass so you can
get protein you know you can get your
protein through meat you can get it
through vegetables and other things as
well beans you know all sorts of other
ways to get it
so that's so this this keto flex 12-3 is
that you're getting into ketosis you're
having a high fiber diet you're having
fasting for a minimum of 12 hours if
you're able before positive 14 to 16
hours is better if you're able before
negative 12 to 14 is fine you need that
time overnight to get some autophagy to
get your glymphatic system you're now
cleaning things up
and to improve your ketosis
so all these things work together to
give you the best synaptic maintenance
and synaptogenesis
so that's why keto flex 12-3
and then three hours is before bed so
you wanna if you don't wanna stop eating
five minutes before you go to bed
because your insulin will still be high
and and by the way have you checked your
cgm yet so continuous glucose monitoring
another quantified self is changing the
world so for i think all your viewers uh
there's so much you can do now that you
wasn't available 10 years ago between
apple watch and aura ring and omron for
blood pressure and ketos you know ketone
checks things like biosense you can do
breathalyzers now um you can check your
your sleep at night you can check your
microbiome you can check your genome i
mean it's it's incredible so you really
can
can fine-tune yourself and improve your
health and improve your long-term
cognition with all the things that are
currently available
yeah continuous glucose monitoring is
fascinating i did that probably for
about six months and i loved it it
turned eating into sort of a game of you
know what's going to spike my glucose
what can i do activity wise to drive it
back down that was really fascinating i
once ate a bowl of ice cream and did
about 300 uh body weight squats and
actually drove my insulin down lower
than before when i ate the ice cream so
that was really interesting it was not
worth it 300 air squats is a lot of air
squats
so i didn't do that anymore but um it
was that was very very interesting and
yeah beginning to understand some of
these in fact i would love to know
um
what are
the tests that somebody should be doing
with frequency to keep a real handle on
their health so you've obviously
mentioned several already we talked
about oximeter
glucose monitoring
what are some of the the things that
people can do
i won't say
where price just doesn't matter but that
are you know it doesn't have to be free
but
is reasonable
and let me ask when you did the cgm did
you drop into hypoglycemia at all
because that's equally damaging to your
brain you don't want to be spiking too
high but we find that a number of people
will wake up in the middle of the night
not realizing they have gone into
hypoglycemia and that is damaging to
your brain so you know that's again why
a high good fats and protein with low
carbs will give you that nice smooth
curve and you don't get these big spikes
and you don't get the big troughs so
here are the things you want to know as
you were asking what do you want to know
here well again you want to go back to
what are the things that are putting you
at risk and what are the things that are
taking away from your best performance
and so you want to know first of all do
i have any systemic inflammation and you
can check your hscrp simple test easy to
do any doctor can do it and draw blood
you can by the way now do we have a
cognoscopy and i made up that word just
because everybody realizes when they
turn 50 they should have a colonoscopy
well for anyone
i recommend this for people for their
40th birthday
get a cognoscope check and see where you
stand and get up here where do we
actually get that
mycognoscopy.com easy to do you can do a
direct cognoscopy and it's just three
things it's some simple blood tests it's
a simple online cognitive assessment and
then the third part is actually uh is
actually optional if you've got symptoms
of cognitive decline you want to include
an mri with volumetrics but if you don't
have any symptoms you're doing well
don't worry about you don't need to do
that third part so it's quite simple
some blood testing and a quick online
cognitive assessment and then what you
want to know is
you want to know the very parameters
that are going to help giving you best
function of your brain so as i said
systemic inflammation
you want to know do you have good
dentition now if you want to check you
could there's a test called oral dna
easy it'll tell you whether you have a
high amount of the pathogens like p
gingivalis those are the guys that end
up in your brain and that are causing
you to make that amyloid over the years
that is affecting your cognition
and then you want to know
for example do you have you mentioned
leaky gut that's a huge issue very
common and a common contributor to
sub-optimal cognition and a sub-optimal
metabolism
so you want to know that and then
you want to know your glucose numbers
and you don't necessarily have to do cgm
although i think it's helpful but if you
just know your homa ir so what that
means is it's checking your fasting
glucose and you're fasting insulin so
some people will have a normal fasting
glucose but they're only able to do that
because they're fasting insulin is
working overtime to keep that glucose in
the normal range is there a home test
for that yeah there's not a home test
for fasting insulin yet unfortunately
so that's a blood test again you can get
it you can get it online but there isn't
a simple
quantified self sort of things a bio
hacking sort of thing that you can do
for that
uh and then you want to know
are you low in specific hormones
nutrients and growth factors and so you
want to know your vitamin d as an
example so we actually created for
people in interested in prevention we
created something called pre-code so if
you look up pre-code
p-r-e-c-o-d-e it'll give you the ability
to get a report and a simple
test that will do the critical things to
know if you are at risk things like your
vitamin d and your thyroid status you
want to know your homocysteine
homocysteine is an indicator of your
ability to methylate which is important
for a number of things one of them being
your detox
and then you want to know your toxicity
status now if you want to look at just
the things you can do by yourself at
home okay again you can order these
tests and then people you can literally
have a someone come to your home and
draw these for you or you can go to a
local center either way but if you just
want to do it by quantified self then i
recommend that people get either an
apple watch an aura ring uh something
like this and again
there are so many things you can do you
can
look at your
you can look at your microbiome
on your own send that literally send
that in
you can look at
your blood pressure check it easily
there's a thing called omron which will
which will allow you to follow it with
your apple tool kit
i mean we have we actually have an app
now that looks at all these various
things and helps you to follow them
along uh you can look at your uh
you can look at your oxygenation as i
mentioned earlier with apple watch and
things like that
then you can also look
at your
at your vascular elasticity
with something that's called i heart so
you can look you take that and look at
your vascular elasticity and then
your heart rate variability and you can
see you know how you're doing for your
age and again you'll you'll notice when
you're under a lot of stress when when
things are tough you're going to have a
much lower heart rate variability when
you're doing well and again you know as
a scientist i never thought the idea of
things like you know things like
meditation i thought these things were
you know worthless and i have to say i
can't ignore the data the data show you
that these things are actually helpful
getting that heart rate variability up
getting that stress down actually turns
out to be to be surprisingly helpful and
interestingly as we were developing
drugs for alzheimer's one of the targets
turns out to be
cr f1 so it's just basically your the
thing that's causing you to release
cortisol of course cortisol releasing
factor has receptors in your brain
and those receptors are when they're
binding you're getting a pro alzheimer's
effect so again you're affecting
cognition
by
running up your cortisol levels so no
question things like meditation and good
sleep getting your heart rate
variability up turn out all to be very
helpful and then do you assume that you
check your vo2 max as well
okay your apple watch has that so you
can see where your vo2 max is yours is
probably very high because if you're in
good shape it should be quite high and
of course it's age related but again
keeping yourself in good shape that's
another thing it's basically telling you
are you able to
metabolize the oxygen and get yourself
appropriate blood flow
and so again all these things are
critical for again for giving yourself
best outcomes and best cognition by the
way and then i think it's helpful to
check glutathione
some people argue that that's one that
uh you know
most people are going to have a decent
level of glutathione but for people who
have toxicity
you have to have some way to determine
you know do i have a lot of ongoing
exposure to toxins so i think it's a
very helpful thing to do
check your glutathione level and also
check to see if you've got toxins if
you've got heavy metals that's an easy
one to check that's a blood test or you
can do it as a urine test some people
like to do it as a provoked urine test
that's fine but one way or another
screening for those metals see where you
stand
and then organics if you've got you know
very high load of
uh you know of persistent organic
pollutants
that's important to know if you've got a
you know if you've got high
exposure to benzene toluene here's an
example we had a person come in a few
years ago
who was
47 years old
with clear cognitive decline
and it turned out that what had happened
is she had been exposed for years and
years to paraffin candle burning and
these things give off high levels of
benzene toluene even some mercury
and so she had extremely high levels
unfortunately uh of those things from
this constant exposure
uh so again helpful to do that and then
look at your look at your mycotoxins and
again there's a separate test for those
there's a couple groups real time does
this and also
gpl
both do these urinary mycotoxins if
you're low hallelujah don't think about
it for a few years but if you're if
you're not realizing that you're exposed
to these things they can give you all
sorts of problems including cognitive
decline where you go in and the doctor
says i don't know why you've got this
your cognition is just not very good
well that's something that's important
to look into
so all these very very helpful
matt all of this has been
extraordinarily helpful i have really
enjoyed not only our time together but
researching you going through your book
um
very very
hopeful the way that you're showing
people that you know we really may be
living through the last generation that
gets
alzheimer's without understanding how to
avoid it and so that is extraordinary
and then being able to use this stuff
for cognitive optimization is incredible
where can people find out more about you
so that they know when the book is
coming out which i believe is later in
what's the best way
yeah good point so the book's kind of
the next book the first survivors of
alzheimer's coming out in august thanks
for asking about that and you can get
more information at dr bredesen.com
uh or you can go to mycognoscopy.com
or you can go to apollo helpful so we
set up a a software company that just
that does software for looking at all
these different variables because again
the future of medicine
is for physicians to work with software
engineers so your generation is going to
have much better cognition than my
generation because we didn't know about
this and you don't have to worry about
alzheimer's it really should be a rare
disease and i'm convinced it will be by
the time you get to my age i think this
will be a very rare condition
amazing thank you so much and guys be
sure to go check out everything that he
has to offer it will change your life
quite literally at the cellular level so
my friends get after it and speaking of
things you should get after if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care thank you guys so much for
watching and being a part of this
community if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe you're going to get weekly
videos on building a growth mindset
cultivating grit and unlocking your full
potential
you